
## **StrikeDB**
### **Promisified server-side prepared statements for node mysqljs**

*Questions or comments can be directed to josh (at) thestrikeagency.com.*

**What:** StrikeDB is a set of wrappers to promisify node-mysql (mysqljs) functions, intended so you can easily use node-mysql with async / await. It also adds server-side prepared statements, and handy variable binding. **Additionally, it converts all =? or =:param bindings to <=> null-safe, and !=? or !=:param bindings to !(:param<=>val). Be aware of this behavior.** The goal is to make node-mysql calls a little more like the synchronous PDO model. It also has the advantage of being able to execute the same prepared statement lots of times asynchronously and awaiting all of them, which you can't do in PHP.

**Why:** I've worked on PHP backends for the last 20 years or so. In the last few years I've done most of my client-side work to Typescript. But I only got around to messing with Node.js in the last week or so, with lots of time to kill in quarantine.
Other promisifying shims in this vein didn't handle transactions on pools well, or they suggested enabling multiple statements as a workaround. This code gives statements first class status and associates them with their connections, so you can easily use them repeatedly, prepare statements on them and stack them in asynchronous patterns, and release them in a clear, concise way. It also allows server-side prepared statements which can be recycled fairly efficiently on the same connection.

**Why maybe not:** Prepared statements compiled and executed as SQL statements are allegedly a lot slower than those prepared on the server by a native abstraction layer. This is probably less of an issue if you're planning on running that statement a thousand times. Node-mysql2 already addresses prepared statements on a lower level. However, it is not as well supported as the original node-mysql. This code also supports an "emulation mode" which shunts prepared statements to the node-mysql escaping mechanism instead of preparing them on the server.

**Why not mysql2:** I had problems using the node-mysql2/promise-mysql2 typings, because they still aren't on @DT. This has apparently been an issue since 2017. I work on an older Mac, where NPM wants a newer version of XCode to run git, and Apple wants me to upgrade my OS to get XCode. I'm just trying to install a single package here, so that's too much work. The mysql2 typings rely on the node-mysql typings anyway, which they shouldn't. Different dev. Anyway, I decided to go with the original node-mysql and bring it up to my needs, and I thought it would be a good starting point just write something that made it behave the way I wanted it to. And good general practice to try to write some PDO-style functionality.

**How:** Check out src/Test.ts for usage examples. I've included ./db_test.sql file if you want to run the examples directly. Or just try it out and craft your own queries.

**Error handling:** This code tries to encompass two distinct styles of error handling. You can set up your DBConnection either with rejectErrors==true (the default), or false. If errorsReject is true, all mysql errors in your await / .then code must be caught as a rejected promise. Promises reject with a DBStatement or DBConnection you called on. Both have an .err parameter. If you set rejectErrors to false, it's a bit more like the PHP model where mysql errors are caught internally, sparing you unnecessary uncaught promise rejections on your queries. However, if you do that, you will have downstream rejections if your queries fail and you try to get their results... so if you don't want to catch rejections on your query promises, you need to check the statements to see whether .err is set. Which is basically the same as PHP, where you have to check after the query whether it worked, rather than having it throw an error in the middle of your execution. Like PDO, the last error caught is the DBConnection.err. And if your statement managed to compile before failing, DBStatement.err will show that.

Feel free to use and improve, if it's helpful. Feedback is always welcome.

------------

### class **Pool**
Wrapper for mysql.pool

------------

 - **getConnection(opts:{rejectErrors:boolean, logQueries?:boolean}):Promise<Connection>**
 
- - **rejectErrors : boolean**
	If set, all further mysql and internal errors on this connection reject with a Statement or Connection (whatever you are awaiting) which both contain an `.err` parameter. If rejectErrors is true, you may `.catch((e)=>e.err.message)` on any call.
	
	
- - **logQueries : boolean** 
If true, all queries performed on the connection are logged to the console.

------------

### class **Statement**
A statement generated by a connection.

------------

 - **err : mysql.MysqlError|{message:string}**
 An object which can be relied on to provide at least a message if an error occurred.
 
 - **result : mysql.OKPacket&any[]**
 The result of a query if one came back. 
 
 - **fields : mysql.FieldInfo[]**
 Standard mysql field descriptions.
 
 - **prepID : number**
 Internal id set by `Connection.prepare()` when generating a statement, this number corresponds to the id of the remotely prepared statement.
 
 - **keys : DBBinding[]**
 Set by `Connection.prepare()`, this array contains the bindings found in the query, in order of their position, for comparison with the value object or array you will execute.
 
 - **useID : number**
 Internal id for setting remote variables prior to each execution. Specifically,  we call`SET @k_useID=value;`, in which `k` is the numeric position of the bound variable in the binding array and `useID` is incremented each time you execute the prepared statement. This prevents asynchronous executions from conflicting. See also **returnNew** below.
 
 - **execute(values?:any, returnNew?:boolean):Promise&lt;Statement&gt;**
 Execute a prepared statement. 
 
 - - **values : any**
 `values` can be either a flat array if the statement was prepared using ??, ?, or it can be a plain object if you prepared with :name.
 
 	When preparing a statement with colons, field and table names take two colons and values take one. Field and table names may *only* be used with emulated prepares.
 
 	When using a statement like:
 `SELECT * FROM ::table WHERE id=:id`
 Your values might look like `{table:"my_table",id:1}`
 However, that would only be allowed on an emulated table. Non-emulated tables can have only `:id`, and would need to be prepared with the table name escaped in advance.
 
 	If your statement looks like this:
 `SELECT * FROM ?? WHERE id=?`
 Your values need to be a flat array in the order of the question marks, such as:
 `['my_table',1]`
 
- - **returnNew : boolean**
If `true`, executing this statement will return a new statement with the result and/or execution error. This is necessary if you're executing a single prepared statement many times asynchronously in a `Promise.all()`. Executing with `returnNew` allows you to collect a list of new statements, each with the original query but with its own results or errors. 

	Normally, `execute()` both updates and returns the original statement. ***New instances of `Statement` returned from `returnNew` are clones. If they are real server-side prepared statements, they cannot be executed again. Only the original statement may be re-executed.*** If the original Statement is not emulated and you try to re-execute the resulting new statement, it will return an `.err` that you have tried to execute an unprepared statement. This is because the resulting new Statement was not prepared server-side. The new Statement returned lacks a `prepID`, intentionally, to prevent it from being executed against existing set @vars. Preventing re-execution of cloned statements is to prevent thread races on their stored variable names.

- **deallocate() : Promise&lt;Statement&gt;**
Deallocates a prepared statement stored on the server. Necessary if you plan to leave a connection open for a long time. 

------------

### class **Connection**
Wrapper for a mysql PoolConnection. Should be created from `Pool.getConnection()`

------------

- **conn : mysql.PoolConnection**
The underlying PoolConnection.

- **err : mysql.MysqlError|{message:string,fatal?:string}**
The most recent mysql.MysqlError on the connection, or if a binding error occurred, an object with the signature `{message:string, fatal?:string}`.

- **rejectErrors : boolean** and **logQueries:boolean**
See Pool.getConnection()

- **lastInsertID() : number**
Does what it says, says what it does.

- **changeUser(opts:mysql.ConnectionOptions) : Promise&lt;Connection&gt;**
Wrapper for MysqlPool.changeUser()

- **prepare(opts:mysql.QueryOptions, emulate?:boolean) : Promise&lt;Statement&gt;**
Prepare a new statement. By default, the statement is prepared on the server. ***You must use emulation if you wish to bind field or table names.*** 

	Additional options set when preparing a statement, such as `nestTables` or `timeout`, will apply to the statement each time you execute it.

- **exec(opts:mysql.QueryOptions, emulate?:boolean) : Promise&lt;Statement&gt;**
Prepare, execute, and return a single statement, deallocating the prepared statement from the server afterwards.

	Takes a classic mysqljs QueryOptions which should look like:
	`{sql:SELECT * FROM table WHERE id=?',values:[1]}` 
	or 
	`{sql:'SELECT * FROM table WHERE id=:id ,values:{id:1}}`

- **beginTransaction(opts?:mysql.QueryOptions) : Promise&lt;Statement&rt;**

- **rollback(opts?:mysql.QueryOptions) : Promise&lt;Statement&gt;**

- **commit(opts?:mysql.QueryOptions) : Promise&lt;Statement&rt;**

- **release() : void**
Release the connection back to the pool.
